Some changes are physical. The material changes form,
shape, or position, but it is not made into a new
substance.
Melting ice is physical. Cutting paper is physical.
Dissolving sugar is physical, because the sugar is spread
out, not rebuilt.
A chemical change is different. In a chemical change, new
substances form.
Chemists look for clues. Not proof from one clue, but
evidence.
One clue is gas being made. Fizzing can mean a gas is
forming. But boiling water also makes bubbles, and that is
not the same as a new gas from a reaction.
Another clue is colour change. If a substance changes
colour during a reaction, something new may be forming.
A temperature change can be a clue too. Some reactions
warm up. Some cool down. The point is that energy is
involved.
Sometimes a new solid appears inside a liquid. It may look
cloudy, or like tiny particles forming. Later we call that
a precipitate.
Light can be a clue. Burning and some reactions give off
light. We are not doing unsafe flames here; we are reading
evidence.
Rusting is a slow chemical change. Iron reacts with oxygen
and water. It slowly ruins things unless we protect the
metal with paint, oil, or keeping it dry.
Indicators give another kind of evidence. A safe indicator
can change colour in acids or alkalis. That does not mean
we taste unknown liquids. Chemistry has rules because
Now compare two changes. Ice melting gives liquid water,
but no new substance. Toast browning makes new substances,
which is why burnt toast does not unburn when it cools
Another comparison: salt dissolving can be reversed by
evaporating the water. Rusting iron is much harder to
reverse because a new substance has formed on the metal.
The clue checklist helps you avoid guessing from one loud
word. Bubbles, colour, temperature, light, or a new solid
can all matter, but the strongest answer explains what new
The deepest idea is this: in a chemical reaction, atoms
are rearranged. They do not vanish. They connect in new
ways to make new substances.
That also means mass does not simply disappear. In a
closed system, the atoms are still there, even if they
have rearranged into gases, liquids, or solids that look
For this course, you do not need balanced equations. You
need the idea behind them: the starting particles are
reactants, the ending substances are products, and the
This is why chemical-change questions should not be
answered from one word alone. Burn, fizz, colour, warm,
cloudy: each word is a clue, but the best answer explains
So when a question shows a before-and-after particle
model, count the atom types. If the same atoms are
connected differently at the end, you are probably looking
The chemist move is: look for clues, ask whether a new
substance formed, and use a particle model to explain the
change.